In this lecture we're going to have a closer look at gradients.
Not only will we be able to make lovely sunsets looking like this.
Change your flag to looking something like this.
But also you can build up some of the items you've already done in this case the sawdust we can see
I can switch it from having a gradient to background on and off because I've made that on a separate
layer using the selection tools I've been able to select the internals of the sword.
So I've got lots of options now to enable and disable gradient fills to have a different artistic feel
based upon the same object.
Okay so now we are back into given the first thing we're going to do as always is create a new file
and we're going to make it 32 by 32.
You probably got the hang of this by now and I'm going to zoom in.
Now we need here first of all use the gradient tool.
I'm going to continue.
Call it the gradient talk.
Its official name is the blend tool and it can be found in the tool box next to the paint buckets.
It is a square that has a gradient across it.
The shortcut key for that is L..
We can select it in the tool box itself or indeed we can go up to tools paint tools and we can see it
there as well.
Once that's selected it is a tool that you were used by clicking and dragging.
Much like drawing a straight line and what that does is tells it gimp where to start and end the foreground
or the blend between the foreground and background colour.
So if I click on the left then drag towards the right.
We get a line appearing and that should go from black on the left to white on the right.
If you make that line shorter then it will simply stop at that point there and continue being white
from the middle onwards.
Now it's not just a foreground to background colour.
There are settings that we'll see in a few moments where you can have more than two colours being blended
between.
So one of the first things we can look at here is the tool options and as well as the normal pastie
the first scene we get to is a gradient selection.
Now this little box that has the gradient from black to white.
If we click on that it gives us a series of presets that have already been made that you can start using
straight away so we can select one like golden and once again go from left to right.
Let's just try that out.
Doesn't that look great.
And this is an example of what I was talking about a moment ago where there is definitely more than
one colour band as we go across and just like the patterns.
There is a gradient tab as well.
Now Mine is already there because it's part of the default set up.
We've got brushes patterns and gradients down on the lower right and if we click on gradients we get
the full list of ones that come preinstalled with Gimp and we'll go about editing these or creating
a new one in a few moments but before we do that let's go and have a look at the rest of the tool options
after the gradient presets we have the shape at the moment it sets to Laon Yes so it's just going to
go straight across.
If we go from one corner to another we can see it's just the linear change across the entire image.
If we change that and have a look at some of the other options here we've got Bilin here.
Well let's give that a go.
What does that look like.
Well it looks exactly the same as the last one because the by linear is going to reflect backwards so
if I go to the middle and drag across we will see there a goat that it's now mirrored the other way.
And if I go diagonally across we'll get a black band or a dark brown band moving across the middle.
Excellent.
And of course if we go back to the black and white standard unjust can pick foreground to background
and just go from the middle out.
Words will get a nice bandaid approach.
There are many other types that we can pick from we've got radio that can be very useful if we got a
black splodge in the middle with it fading out radially i.e. in a circle.
From that point.
And there are many others that you can play with here.
There is even a spiral if you so wish.
The next option down is repeating and it's greyed out on the spiral so let's go back to something like
radio.
And if we set that to Sawtooth we will see that it repeats over and over and over.
So if I just draw myself a small line we see that it repeats itself going from black to white to black
to white to black to white and over and over again.
That's the nature of a sawtooth wave.
It goes from one extreme to another and then defaults back to zero and starts all over again.
Now the other option there apart from none is triangular wave so this will go from black to white and
then back to black before it goes to white again.
So if we draw a similar size line we see that we get a completely different effect to what we had before
and this is true with whichever one of these you pick.
If it's allowable so with linnea that's still the same sorts of thing we get stripes if we go to a sawtooth
wave we're going to end up with a much harsher division between the two.
And as you can see they are totally different when you look at them.
Now the offset tool is an interesting one and I'm going to leave repeating turned on at the moment because
you see it only offsets the first part and the numbers that are here are not pixels.
They are a percentage of the line that you draw.
So if I draw from one corner to the other corner we will see that we get our standard gradient.
If I set that offset at around 50 percent and draw it from here to there.
I'd expect it to be black all the way up to around 50 percent which it is and when it comes to repetition.
If I go from here to maybe a quarter of the way across you will see that it only affects the first one.
It does not affect the repetition.
There are there and I personally haven't come across a real use for the offset if an offset is required.
I usually bake it into the gradient change itself and we'll get onto that in a few moments when we come
to making our own gradient.
Now there are two final options that are devouring an adaptive soup per sampling and to be quite honest
at this low resolution we are not going to really see an effect with eeva of these two.
Simply put dithering is the act of including colours that aren't in the start or end to help smooth
the transition between one colour and another when using the blend tool and adaptive super sampling
is all about making edges less jagged.
Now we are dealing with a 32 by 32 pixel image jagged edges are part of what makes pixel art look like
pixel art so we're not going to be able to really see any difference with either of these two turned
on the simple gradient changes are spread amongst so few pixels that dithering is not going to take
in to affect at all and adapt super sampling to lower pixel counts to worry about not having jagged
edges.
Now the exciting part here is when you get to make your own gradient of course the first level of customization
when it comes to making your own gradient is to literally change the background of foreground colours
so if we go from red to blue.
Oh and if I remember to switch them round there we go.
So we've got a foreground of red background a blue and glow of offset back down.
We can see that's already were going to go from red to magenta all the way to blue.
So if I just do that now we see we get all my work that is bright so that is one way that you can create
a gradient.
The other.
If you've created your own palette.
If I go and find my fire palette that I made earlier.
If I right click on a palette it will give us an option further down palette to gradients or palette
to repeated gradient.
So if I go ahead and do palettes a gradient with my fire we will see that in the gradients there is
now one called Fire and if I just drag and test that.
How cool is that.
That's a gradient that I've made now by just a few clicks.
Now if you want to go into some more advanced gradient editing we're going to have to use the gradient
editor.
Now that's not going to be included in this lecture.
We've covered enough with the blend tools so far this time to cement that knowledge.
Now in the form of a challenge.
And in this challenge I'd like you once again to create four images.
Now use existing images or create new.
You can see a bit of a theme coming here by using existing images your learning how to modify existing
images and repurpose them for other uses or using them just as a simple base or an outline to create
new ones.
Or indeed you can just create brand new ones right from scratch.
Now do use gradients where you can perhaps creating shading or gorgeous backgrounds for your icons and
using the selection tools can help you with localized gradients.
If you want to use them there as well.
So go ahead.
A video now and give that a go.
Okay guys welcome back.
Let's go ahead and make a couple more images using gradients.
Okay so for this example I am going to go ahead and load up my sword that I made in the film challenge
and I assume all the way in control shift in J.
So I've got these areas here where I can have some shading.
Let's go ahead and see if we can use some gradients and make this maybe a little prettier.
I don't know how it's going to look.
Let's let's just give it a go and let's start with this golden or yellow handle.
I'm going to go to my gradient so go to the tool options.
And from the gradients themselves I can scroll down this list here of course within the tool options
or I can go across to gradients on the gradient tab and scroll down.
And I.
I've seen one that I quite like it's the one we played with before golden.
And so I'm going to select the right areas.
I'm going to go to where it is Blade.
In fact it just has blade here.
Let's just call this flat shading for that is more appropriate to what we're actually doing.
And this is the sword outline.
Okay so we've got sword out line and flat shading.
I'm going to create a new layer and I'm going to call this.
I don't know what it's called hand guard.
You're not sure it is name exactly what it does.
Okay so who got handguard here.
We've got the gradient tool the selection I'm going to use.
My.
I'm going to use my fuzzy select tool and make sure sample merge is turned on so I can select the yellow
area underneath and then I'm just going to play with the gradient till now.
I think I want it going this way diagonally across and I'm going to make sure hold down Shift and control
to lock it to 45 degrees.
Oh that looks pretty good.
Let's try a couple of other ones.
There's that.
There's that how if it's really short or that's a bit strong.
K.
I liked that first one there.
Okay that's one bit of shading done.
How about the handle down here.
Well we can probably get away.
Can we let's just give it a go.
So handle these.
I really want to know what these sordin Names are called.
Let's just have a look at that now.
Parts of sword.
Okay so it looks like looking at a description of a sword.
It's called the grip and a cross guard.
Okay.
It seems that I wasn't too far away from handguard Let's call this grip that makes sense because that
was just one interpretation of it.
Let's go ahead and select this little brown area down here.
And this time and see if the condensed version of that works or whether we need to do something else.
I think that matches too much to the other one that we've got there.
So let's fill this instead with a pattern.
So we're going to pattern fill and let's try one of the wood effects.
I'm not sure I like what I'm not and I'm also not sure whether that's taking as I would expect someone
to fill the whole selection instead.
There we go.
That's better.
So we've now got a nice handle based upon a fill.
How about the blade itself is there anything we can do with that.
Let's go ahead and find some greys or silvers in the gradient tool and see if we can make a difference
using that all metallic something.
Well I'm up for giving that a go at select this area down here and gradient tool let's call this new
one blade this new layer that we're creating to have got a blade layer.
Let's try that's all.
I reckon that could work out quite well you know with that there.
And then if we select the other one and do the gradient on the other side.
How does that work out that could work well if we now have a background that suitable.
Now I'm going to try a warmer background so let's scroll down here.
I could of course create my own gradient if it's if this doesn't work.
Let's try this just try incandescent and I d select everything and I'm gonna use a shortcut key control
shift in a say me go into the menu and the background is there is just it just turned off.
Let's try the other way.
Mm.
Kind of works just goes a bit too dark.
So what can we do in that case we can edit this gradient.
Or of course we can find maybe a more suitable one all.
What about the fire one that I made earlier.
Fire.
Let's go across and do that.
Cool.
Got a funky background there for our sort.
So we can see here how a simple flat shaded sword with a few gradients on it ends up looking completely
different obviously its shape is still the same but it's overall feel is completely different to that
of when it was just flat shaded.
Interesting.
And there's lots more of course you can do with gradients especially if you started using some of the
other shapes as well.
I'd love to see what you guys have come up with so please do show your work in the discussions and I
will see you guys in the next lecture.